# Legalsynth: An Automatic Text Summarization System for Legal Instruments in the Philippines
Authors: Eli Harold R. Guerrero and Arian Jacildo

Legal instruments, such as deeds, laws, and court cases, often contain complex and technical language, making it difficult for laypeople to understand without the guidance of a legal expert. This challenge can impede effective engagement in legal transactions wherein miscommunication and confusion can lead to serious consequences. In this study, a web application called LegalSynth was developed to help laypeople comprehend and understand these highly technical and domain-specific legal documents. For this study, a pre-trained Large Language Model GPT 3.5-Turbo was used to condense these documents. Using BERTScore, an automatic evaluation metric that measures semantic similarity, the system scored an F1 score of 0.60 which indicated a moderate level of accuracy. Using a manual evaluation metric which was conducted on legal experts and laypeople using a tailor-fit questionnaire for evaluating well-made summaries, it was observed that the respondents were overall satisfied with the quality of the automatically generated summaries with scores ranging from 4.17 to 4.60 (out of 5) for each attribute evaluated. Lastly, an SUS was conducted which garnered high ratings with an average score of 88.5% which falls in the excellent range. Further improvements for LegalSynth include fine-tuning an LLM to cater for summarization tasks specific to legal instruments in the Philippines which would be made possible by acquiring larger datasets.
